---
title: Rustc Dev Guide WG 2019-07-09 sync meeting
type: docs
---
# Rustc Dev Guide WG 2019-07-09 sync meeting


- some discussion about organizing lectures on missing topics
    - it's hard because the preparation may put off potential lecturers
    - maybe instead go for more informal zulip-based "explain everything you know about X"
        - can then summarize zulip log

- agreed to change terminology from "transcribe" -> "summarize"

- mark-i-m volunteers to try to organize meeting with petrochenkov about macros
- amanjeev volunteers to try to organize meeting with nagisa or alexchricton about codegen

- some discussion of how to assign work, organize lectures, etc, but not super conclusive
    - spastorino suggested making the next meeting 1 hour, instead of 30 minutes.
